# 1. How to use units #

## Using units ##

All the library is under the namespace omni::.

OmniUnit defines most of the main physical units from the metric, imperial, astronomic and micriscopic systems.
You can find all the predefined units in the related pages.
If you want to use a unit which is not predefined in OmniUnit, look at __how to create units__.

Units are generic. When you use them, you have to precise the arithmetic type which is handled inside them :

    omni::gram<int> var1(10);     //var1 equals 10
    omni::gram<int> var2(12.9);   //var2 equals 12, the value is truncated, not rounded
    omni::gram<float> var3(12.9); //var3 equals 12.9
    //you can of course use any primitive type

    var1 = var3; //var1 equals 12, the value is truncated, not rounded

If you don't need units to handle different types inside them, you can use the default type. Units using the default type begin with a capital :

    #define OMNI_DEFAULT_TYPE float //not mandatory, this value equals "double" by default

    omni::meter<> var4(0); //the internal type of var4 is float
    omni::Meter var5(0); //notice the capital
    //var4 and var5 are exaclty the same, but the definition of var5 is most user friendly

So __all__ non-defaulted units begin with a tiny character, while __all__ defaulted units begin with a capital.


## Implicit conversions ##

You can convert a unit to another **if they have the same dimension** (mass in these examples) :

    omni::kilogram<float> var1(3.1);
    omni::milligram<float> var2(var1);  //conversion by construction
    omni::milligram<float> var3 = var1; //conversion by assignment
    //var2 and var3 equal 3100000

you can of course use conversion by explicit cast :

    auto var4 = omni::unit_cast<omni::microgram<int>>(var1); //var4 is a microgram<int>
    auto var5 = omni::unit_cast<omni::milli>(var1);          //var5 is a gram<float> (because kilogram is the base mass unit)
    auto var6 = omni::unit_cast<short>(var1);                //var6 is a kilogram<short>
    auto var7 = omni::unit_cast<omni::E1>(var1);             //var1 looks like a kilogram<float> but with origin = 10 (see the meaning of origin of a unit in "how to create units")

## Compile-time dimension check ##

Dimension check is done at compile-time, which mean that if you made a dimensional error, the code won't compile. It is one of the goals of omniunit, preventing calculation errors.

    omni::Kilometer var1(1);
    omni::Hour var2(1);

    omni::Gram var3 = var1/var2;
    //ERROR : var3 is of dimension MASS while var1/var2 is of dimension SPEED. This doesn't compile

    omni::MeterPerSecond var4 = var1/var2;
    //OK, although var1/var2 returns kilometerPerHour, it and var4 have the same dimension. There will just be an implicit conversion

Generally, given the internal complexity of OmniUnit types, compilation errors are very long and hard to read. You have to look for the presence of :

    error: static assertion failed: ...

or

    error: conversion from ...

If one of these two lines are present, then you probably tried to sum/subtract/assign two values with defferent dimensions, or you tried to pass to exp(), log(), or other function a value which is not dimensionless. You have to fix the homogeneity of your calculation.

## Compliance between standard duration and OmniUnit duration ##

If you are familiar with standard duration (std::chrono::duration), you may want to use and convert them into OmniUnit duration, and vice versa.
Happily, there is a full compliance between them. You can simply do this by constructing or assigning them :

    omni::Millisecond omni1(1.8);
    std::chrono::hours standard1(omni1); //construction
    //notice that here, std::chrono::hours handle an integer while omni::Millisecond handle a double by default, so trucations may appear

    std::chrono::hours standard2 = omni1; //assignment
    //idem

    //reciprocally
    omni1 = standard2; //assignment
    omni::Year omni2(standard2); //construction

conversion by explicit cast :

    auto omni3 = omni::unit_cast<omni::second<int>>(standard2);
    auto standard3 = omni::unit_cast<std::chrono::nanoseconds>(omni2);

However, you can't use an implicit conversion between standard and OmniUnit duration to pass a parameter to a function, you have to do that explicitly :

    void foo1(std::chrono::hours) {//do something};
    void foo2(omni::Second) {//do something};

    std::chrono::seconds standard4(1);
    omni::Millisecond omni4(2.1);

    foo1(omni4); //ERROR
    foo1(std::chrono::hours(omni4)); //OK
    foo1(omni::duration_cast<std::chrono::hours>(omni4)); //OK

    foo2(standard4); //ERROR
    foo2(omni::Second(standard4)); //OK
    foo2(omni::duration_cast<omni::Second>(standard4)); //OK

The previous tips may be useful if you want to pass an omni::duration to std::this_thread::sleep_for(), for exemple.

## About angles ##

Angles are dimensionless units. So, although it is physically wrong, it is sufficient to implement them the same way. Thus, in OmniUnit :

    1 scalar = 1 radian = 1 steradian

assuming here that scalar is a simple dimensionless number. You can see that in OmniUnit, radian and steradian are considered to be the basic unit of angle and solid angle.

The other effect of this fact is that multiplying by an angle doesn't change the dimension of the result. It means for exemple that luminous intensity (candela) and luminous flux (lumen) have exactly the same dimension.

So you are asked to be careful : compilation error **WON'T** occur if you mix angle and solid angle : mistakes can happen.

## Mathematic functions ##

The five main operators are provided : +-*/% (together with +=, -=, *=, /=, %=, ++, -- and unary -)

Of course, using units only with these main operators looks limited. thus, some other functions are provided.

Exponential/power functions :
* exp()    : taking a dimensionless value, and optionally a basis
* log()    : taking a dimensionless value, and optionally a basis
* pow<>()  : taking the exponent by template parameter (must be an integer, equals 2 by default)
* nroot<>(): taking the basis by template parameter (must be an integer, equals 2 by default)
* sqrt()

Trigonometric functions :
* cos() : taking a dimensionless value
* sin() : taking a dimensionless value
* tan() : taking a dimensionless value
* sec() : taking a dimensionless value
* csc() : taking a dimensionless value
* cot() : taking a dimensionless value
* acos(): taking a dimensionless value
* asin(): taking a dimensionless value
* atan(): taking a dimensionless value
* asec(): taking a dimensionless value
* acsc(): taking a dimensionless value
* acot(): taking a dimensionless value

Hyperbolic functions :
* cosh() : taking a dimensionless value
* sinh() : taking a dimensionless value
* tanh() : taking a dimensionless value
* sech() : taking a dimensionless value
* csch() : taking a dimensionless value
* coth() : taking a dimensionless value
* acosh(): taking a dimensionless value
* asinh(): taking a dimensionless value
* atanh(): taking a dimensionless value
* asech(): taking a dimensionless value
* acsch(): taking a dimensionless value
* acoth(): taking a dimensionless value

Rounding functions :
* ceil()
* floor()
* round()
* trunc()

**Of course, these functions are defined for values with OmniUnit types, they do not accept values with primitives types.**

## Constexpr instances ##

To improve the execution speed of your application, you can perform calculations at compile time : it is a kind of metaprogramming.
To do so, you have to declare a value with the **constexpr** keyword :

    constexpr omni::Meter var1(1.2);
    constexpr omni::Second var2(3.55);
    constexpr omni::MeterPerSecond = var1/var2;

A constexpr variable must be declared and initialized at the same time. You cannot use value determined during runtime. Moreover, a constexpr variable is const, once initialized, you cannot change its value.

    int a = 3;
    constexpr omni::Newton(a) var3; // ERROR : "a" is not constexpr

    constexpr int b = a;
    constexpr omni::Newton(b) var4; // ERROR : "a" is not constexpr

    constexpr int c = 3;
    constexpr omni::Newton(b) var5; // OK

    omni::Meter var6(1.2);
    constexpr omni::Second var7(3.55);
    constexpr omni::MeterPerSecond = var1/var2; // ERROR : var7 is not constexpr

    var7++; //ERROR : var7 is constexpr and cannot be modified

    var7 = omni::MeterPerSecond(2); // idem

    constexpr auto var8 = omni::pow<3>(omni::Value(1.54)); // OK

Focus on var8 : the function omni::pow is constexpr. In fact, all mathematic functions provided by OmniUnit are constexpr.


## Runetime errors and exception safety ##

Most of the library works at compile time, there is absolutly no exception throwing in order to allow constexpr units and functions (see the previous section).
Nevertheless, **there is no** "no throw guarentee" because some __standard__ functions (exp, log, pow, round, cos...) used in Omniunit at runtime may (or not) throw. See the exception safety of these functions in the C++ standard documentation.

The others errors that could occur during execution are :
* domain errors like division by zero, or calculating log(0) : to follow the C++ standard, the behavior in OmniUnit is undefined ;
* too large or too small numbers (obtained for exemple by conversion from gigaparsec to nanometer, or by exp/pow functions) : again, the behavior is the same as the C++ standard when you reach the maximum of a variable.